Mechanism of corrosion protection in reinforced Ti-6Al-4V alloy by wire arc additive manufacturing using magnetic arc oscillation

ABSTRACT 
       In this study, corrosion performance of Ti-6Al-4V alloy that have been fabricated 
using wire arc additive manufacturing (WAAM) with magnetic arc oscillations were 
fully explored by means of material characterization and electrochemical corrosion 
testing. Compared to stable arc, oscillated arc specimens impart superior corrosion 
resistance owing to refined α grains that bring substantial grain boundaries to produce 
copious ion position or reactive site, allowing for rapid formation of passive film 
which is insusceptible to chloride-induced localized attack. For typical α + β structure, 
lamellar α size plays a critical role in passive film generation, growth and dissolution 
in corrosive media. 

1. Introduction 
       Wire and arc additive manufacturing (WAAM) is considered to be an economic 
technology suitable to produce large-scale metallic components in both material and 
cost savings [1], thereby it has been widely explored in aerospace, automotive, marine 
and nuclear sectors [2-4]. However, by an intrinsic thermal history, WAAM-fabricated 
compounds often suffer from clear anisotropy in material properties due to large columnar grains formed along building direction. It is difficult to obtain equiaxed 
grains evolution during WAAM deposition, since the grain growth will occur at the 
maximum thermal gradient under re-heating conditions. How to improve such 
situation has been an increased attention for current WAAM technologies.   
 To improve WAAM-fabricated part quality, magnetic arc oscillation (MAO) 
technique, recently, has been introduced in deposit, creating an artificial agitation into 
melt pool to refine grains [5-6]. Complementary study has also applied magnetic 
oscillation to minimize overflow of melt pool and subsequently increase deposition 
efficiency in WAAM [5]. By the used of MAO, surface tension force and viscous 
friction of melt pool can also be changed to improve geometric accuracy of WAAM-
produced components [6]. Overall, reducing power density, dispersing arc pressure, 
enhancing heat dissipation, and stirring columnar grains during deposition using 
MAO were effective in producing desirable geometric features and fine-equiaxed 
microstructures. 
 The corrosion performance is very critical to Ti-6Al-4V alloy for industrial 
applications, and it is inseparable from microstructural evolution, including grain size, 
texture and phase constituent et al [7]. For example, Xia et al [8] confirmed that the 
addition of Zr elements in Ti-6Al-4V alloy could refine α grains to produce more 
homogeneous oxide layer during passivation process. This benefits production of 
substrate. To improve corrosion resistance for Ti-6Al-4V alloy, many existing studies 
have paid attention to its microstructural optimization. Dai et.al [9] reported the 
corrosion behavior of selective laser melted Ti-6Al-4V, and they found that owing to 
the anisotropic microstructures in α-Ti and β-Ti phases, the component in building 
direction exhibited a better corrosion resistance than its in travelling direction. Bai et 
al. [10] found that for EBM-produced Ti-6Al-4V component, the high fraction of β 
phase could increase the charge transfer resistance in passive layer and then reduce 
the dissolution rate of Ti-6Al-4V alloy. This process offers an improvement in 
corrosion properties of substrate alloy. As can be seen, for Ti-6Al-4V alloy, 
microstructural features and phase compositions have significant effects on its 
corrosion behavior [11]. 

This work is part of our going studies to comparatively investigate corrosion 
property of Ti-6Al-4V components that fabricate using WAAM with/without magnetic 
arc oscillation. Here, three thin-wall Ti-6Al-4V alloy structures were deposited using 
different arc oscillation patterns and their corrosion properties, including open circuit 
potential (OCP), potentiodynamic polarization, electrochemical impedance 
spectroscopy (EIS), were apprised in light of the current process evaluation. To enable 
a better understanding of the underlying corrosion mechanism for as-fabricated 
materials, in-depth analysis on corrosion protective films, including passive film and 
trans-passive film were detailed. The research outcomes will provide guidance to 
future process development and microstructure control.    


2. Experimental Procedures 
2.1 Specimen preparation 
 In this study, a self-assembled Gas Tungsten Arc Welding (GTAW)-based 
WAAM system, as shown in Fig.1, was applied to fabricate Ti-6Al-4V components 
using commercially available Ti-6Al-4V welding wire (1.2 mm diameter) deposited 
onto Ti-6Al-4V substrate (200 × 150 × 6 mm in length × width × thickness). Two 
kinds of magnetic arc oscillation (MAO) patterns were applied in the WAAM process: 
arc longitudinal oscillation along the travel direction (AL) and arc rotation (AR). The 
details of how to realize different arc oscillations can be found in our previous study 
[12]. The chemical composition of feedstock materials is offered in Table 1, and the 
process parameters are listed in Table 2. Three thin-wall structures were deposited by 
stable arc (AS), AL and AR, respectively, and obtained specimens are termed as 
corresponding arc state. During deposition, the arc oscillation amplitude was set to 5 
mm and the oscillation frequency was kept to 10 Hz. The shielding gas used 99.995 % 
pure argon to protect both GTAW torch and trailing shield in deposition. 

2.2 Materials characterization 
 Metallographic specimens were extracted from the mid-section of the as-
fabricated samples, and then they were hot mounted, ground and polished according 
to standard metallographic preparation. The phase composition was detected using an 
X-ray diffraction (XRD) on a GBC MMA X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation 
in a scanning step of 0.02°. The microstructural features were observed and analyzed 
by means of electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) on an EDAX-TSL Nordly max3 
field emission gun SEM (FEG-SEM) equipped with Oxford Instruments (OI) Nordlys 
II(S) camera. Post-processing of EBSD data was undertaken using the OI HKL-
Channel 5 software suite. The chemical compositions and elemental valence states in 
passive film were identified using an AXIS SUPRA X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy 
(XPS). The surface observation for passive film were performed on a Hitachi SU5000 
SEM equipped with oxford EDS. The passive film was obtained by using a Helios G4 
Focused Ion Beam, and further observed by a JEOL-F200 Transmission Electron 
Microscope. 
2.3 Electrochemical tests 
        Electrochemical tests were performed on an electrochemical analyzer (Shanghai 
Chenhua instruments Co. Ltd, China) by using a conventional three-electrode cell 
system in where a saturated calomel electrode (SCE) was applied as the reference 
electrode, and a platinum wire was used as the counter electrode. Before tests, 
metallographic surface was ground and polished according to standard specimen 
preparation, aiming to remove surface oxide layers. The electrochemical active area of 
working electrodes was kept at 0.2 cm2. The specimens were firstly immersed in 
corrosive solution for sufficient time to obtain a stable OCP, and then EIS tests were 
carried out at the frequency range of 0.01 Hz–100 kHz with an amplitude of 10 mV. 
Potentiodynamic polarization tests were implemented in the wide potential range at a 
scan rate of 5 mV/s in 0.6M NaCl solution. To better understanding of passive film 
growth, the as-fabricated specimens were respectively examined by using 
potentiostatic polarization at potential of 1VSCE, 2VSCE, 4VSCE and 6VSCE for 3000s. 
After that, EIS tests were performed on potentiostatic polarization specimens. 
Reliable data were obtained by repeated electrochemical test at least three times for 
data reproducibility. 
3. Results  
3.1 Microstructures 
       Fig.2 presents micrographs of as-fabricated Ti-6Al-4V specimens under different 
process conditions. It can be observed that a typical Widmanstätten microstructure 
was formed via sympathetic β-to-α transformation, where hexagonal close-packed α 
phases were embedded in prior body-centred cubic β phases. AS sample exhibits few 
globular α phase, while AR and AL specimens show fully refined grains (primary 
acicular martensite α’ phase formed along α lamellae grain boundaries) with substantial proportion of low-angle grain boundaries (LAGBs, 2° < LAGB < 15°) that 
were depicted as black lines. For AS, AR and AL specimens, the average size of 
lamellar αwas measured to be 1.06μm to 0.76μm and 0.67μm. Accordingly, grain 
refinement took place, due to string melt pool by arc oscillations in deposit [12]. It 
needs to be noted that the grain-refining efficiency of as-fabricated titanium is 
determined by arc oscillation frequency and amplitude, here it is not the main focus of 
this study and will be discussed in the future work.  Fig.3 presents the XRD patterns of as-fabricated Ti-6Al-4V at different process 
condition. As can be seen, all specimens were dominated by α/α´ phase and no 
obvious β-phase diffraction peaks due to small amount to detect after deposition [9, 
13]. For AS specimen, only the peaks corresponding to the hcp structure of α-phase 
were observed, while for AL and AR specimens, two new peaks appeared at 2θ values 
of 53.24° and 63.46°, corresponding to the α (1012) and α (1120) planes [12]. It is also found that the introduction of MAO have a significant influence on grain growth 
orientation and crystal structures during Ti-6Al-4V deposition, which is primarily 
related to temperature gradients and oscillation stirring effects into melt  pool [6]. 

3.2 Electrochemical studies 
        Fig.4 describes OCP variation of as-received Ti-6Al-4V alloy specimens in 0.6M 
NaCl solution. It is apparent that three specimens exhibit the same cathodic process 
owing to the prominent inhabitation of anode process during passivation [14]. As can 
be seen, all OCP values firstly presented an increase and then gradually reached to a 
stable process after about 15000 seconds, which indicates a gradual densification of 
passive film on Ti-6Al-4V surface and subsequently a decrease of corrosion tendency 
[15]. The stable OCP values for AS, AR and AL specimens are 0.038V, 0.039V and 
0.059V, respectively. It is well known that a small OCP value often represents a high 
corrosion resistance. Hence, compared to all the specimens, AL sample have the 
optimal corrosion resistance. 
 Fig. 5 displays the potentiodynamic polarization curves of as-received specimens 
in 0.6M NaCl solution. All specimens have similar cathode polarization curves, and 
no well-defined Tafel slopes are presented in the anodic region [14]. It is found that 
by the addition of MAO process, AL and AR specimens have low anodic current 
density and reduced anodic dissolution rate in corrosion media. In other words, the 
gradual increase in anodic current density throughout a wide range of potentials is 
attributed to anodic dissolution rate that is prevented by the formation of oxide film 
on surface.  With applied potential increase, the current density firstly appears a mutation and 
then continues to rise until it reaches to a maximum value, which suggests a 
deterioration process for passivation film [16]. The mutative position was breakdown 
potential (Eb) and greater values of Eb implies more stable passive film formed on 
metal surface [14]. When applied potential exceeds Eb, corrosion process goes to a 
trans-passive region [17]. From Fig. 4, passivation current density (ip) represents 
current for stabilizing passive film that plays a key role in protection of alloy, and 
small value of ip often suggests low dissolution rate of corresponding passive film [18]. 
By calculation, corrosion parameters are listed in Table 3. As can be seen, AL sample 
presents the highest Eb values and the lowest ip value, meanwhile it also exhibits wide range in passivation region, which demonstrates the most stable passivation film and 
the lowest dissolution rate compared to AR and AS specimens.  

3.3 Potentiostatic polarization 
      According to potentiodynamic polarization curves (Fig.5), passive film formed at 
potentials of 1V, 2V, 4V and 6V was comparatively discussed to further explore 
passive characterization of as-fabricated Ti-6Al-4V alloys under different process 
conditions. Fig. 6 and Table 4 shows EIS profiles for all specimens immersed in 0.6 
M NaCl solution. Generally, electrochemical impedance are related to semicircle 
diameter of Nyquist diagram, and reciprocally proportional to corrosion rate [15]. As 
can be seen, when polarization potential increases from 1V to 6V, electrochemical 
impedance sees a gradual rise, illustrating growth and compact of passivation film. 
From Fig.6, dynamic impedance coincides with the variation of RCT, and in low 
frequency range, low phase angle often suggests high corrosion rate for producing 
passive film at low polarization potential [19, 20].  Fig. 7a shows EIS fitting curves by an equivalent circuit, including solution 
resistance (Rs), film resistance R1, constant phase element (CPE), charge transfer 
resistance Rct and double-layer capacitance C. As electrode surface is inhomogeneous, 
CPE is applied to substitute an ideal capacitance [21]. The CPE is defined as follows: 
 𝑍𝐶𝑃𝐸 = [𝑄( i w)𝑛]−1 ( 1 ) 
where Q is the CPE constant, ω is the angular frequency (in rad/s), i is the imaginary 
number (i2=-1), and n is the CPE exponent, which is used to gauge surface 
heterogeneity, a value of n equal to one indicates an ideal capacitor and a lower value 
of n indicates a higher deviation of CPE from an ideal [21, 22].  Fig. 7b further shows Rct values for as-corroded specimens. It is well accepted that 
EIS outcomes are consistent with those obtained from fitting circuit, and AL specimen 
exhibits the highest Rct value, allowing for better corrosion resistance compared to 
other two samples.  
 The thickness of passive film can be calculated according to the research of Hsu 
 and Mansfeld. where ε is the dielectric constant (100 for TiO2 ), δ is the dielectric constant of free 
space (8.86 ×10 −14 F·cm−1), S is the nominal surface area (cm−2) and d is the passive 
layer thickness (nm). The average thickness of passive film was calculated to be 0.29, 
1.21 and 1.93 nm for AS, AR and AL, respectively. Indeed, the increase in thickness 
of passive film improved the resistance against electrochemical corrosion. This result 
also explained the more positive OCP value for AL sample in 0.6 M NaCl solution. 
Fig. 8 shows surface appearance and chemical composition of passive film 
polarized at the 6 V of constant potential. It is found that for AS and AR samples, so-
formed pits were clearly observed on their surface after re-passivation (Ellipse marker 
area), while no obvious pits were produced at AL surface. Some gray areas were 
detected, which might be the surface contaminations. EDS analysis shows that the 
passive film mainly consisted of Ti, O, Al. V and C elements, as the chemical 
composition of selected area shown in Table 5. It is observed that the proportion of Ti 
element in passive film is higher for AL and AR than for AS.


3.4 Dissolution behavior  
        To further investigate dissolution differences between various specimens, surface 
appearance and its chemical composition were observed and analyzed by using SEM, 
EDS and XPS after kinetic potential polarization tests. Fig. 9 and Fig.10 exhibit 
surface characteristics of as-corroded specimens. It is recognized that the pockmarks 
made by electrochemical dissolution are observed in dissolved regions for all samples, 
and their shapes are similar with lamellar α appearance. This demonstrates that for Ti-
6Al-4V alloy, α phases will be firstly dissolved because β phase is comparatively hard 
and has high resistance to corrosion [22]. Furthermore, a protective layer, as a 
secondary layer, was formed in dissolved regions due to corrosion products 
accumulation. In comparison of all three specimens, AL and AR have passive layers 
with highly dense density, but AS has slightly protective layers. This demonstrates 
that MAO-produced specimens have low dissolution rate and better corrosion 
resistance. From chemical composition, it needs to be mentioned that V elements 
benefits the improvement of corrosion performance on passivation film, especially in 
AL and AR specimens with high level of proportion. To further examine chemical compositions of passive film, X-ray photoelectron 
spectroscopy was performed on corrosive surface, and the obtained spectrum is shown in Fig. 11. It is well accepted that Ti, C, V, O and Al elements were detected. Fig.11 b 
to further show high-resolution of Ti 2p and Al 2p spectra for AS, AR and AL samples. 
The Ti 2p1/2 and Ti 2p3/2 peaks were observed at 464.1 eV and 458.7 eV for Ti4+ oxide 
state. The peak located at 457.4 eV corresponded to Ti3+ oxide state [17, 23]. The Al 
2p peaks of all samples are located at 74.5 eV, indicating that the Al converts into the 
form of Al2O3. Therefore, it can be concluded that the passivation film still exists in 
undissolved regions, and it may be composed of TiO2, Ti2O3, Al2O3 and a small 
amount of V oxides. Fig.12 shows TEM observation of passive film near dissolution regions on AL 
sample. A non-homogeneous passive film was distributed on the surface due to a 
smaller dissolution rate than formation rate under the increase of applied potential, 
which will be further discussed in the next section. The primary composition of 
passivated film are Ti, Al, O and a small amount of V elements, which is consistent 
with the XPS spectra and EDS results. 

4. Discussion 
4.1 The relations between corrosion resistance and microstructural evolution 
       During WAAM, the use of magnetic arc oscillation creates an agitation effect on 
melt pool, bringing refined grains to the microstructure. For Ti-6Al-4V alloy with a typical α+β structure, refined α lamella grains can act as a buffer layer to reduce the 
galvanic coupling corrosion effect between α and β phases [24]. In other words, the 
lamellar α grains were refined and more grain boundaries were obtained, which could 
add more ion diffusion or reactive sites to produce passive films. Ralston found that 
the relation between grain size and corrosion rate follows the Hall-Petch relationship 
[25]: 
where j is corrosion current density, W is grain size, constant 𝑎 is likely to be a 
function of environment, in where the same material may have a different corrosion 
rate in different electrolytes, and b represents a material constant and it is negative in 
a passive solution and positive in an active solution [25]. Accordingly, Li et al. [26] 
proposed a modified formula to describe the effect of lamellar α size on corrosion rate 
of Ti-6Al-4V alloy, which expresses as: 
where Sn is standard deviation in a number-weight W distribution, 𝑊

̅ is average size 
of α lath width. In this study, for AS, AR and AL specimens, the average size of 
lamellar α size was measured to be 1.06μm to 0.76μm and 0.67μm and the standard 
deviation was calculated to be 0.28 μm, 0.21 μm and 0.14 μm, respectively, as shown 
in Fig. 13. It is well accepted that AL and AR samples have comparatively small α 
size and thereby they can be seen an improvement in corrosion resistance. 
4.2 Generation, growth and breakdown process of passivation film on Ti-6Al-4V 
surface 
4.2.1 Generation 
 During corrosion process, the passive film growth speed and corrosion 
performance are often bound up with metal surface characteristics, specifically the 
transport rate of point defects [16, 27]. The passive film growth can be deduced based 
on the i-T diagram from potentiostatic polarization, as shown in Fig.14 (im is the 
maximum passive current density, Tm indicates the period to reach the maximum 
current density). It is accepted that when T<Tm, im exhibits a dramatic increase and it 
reaches to the maximum value at T=Tm state, which indicates a generation and growth 
of pitting corrosion on alloy surface. When T >Tm, im shows a slow decrease and it 
finally reaches to a steady state. This is mainly attributed to the accumulation of 
corrosion products and re-passivation process [28]. For AS more sub-stable pitting 
and re-passivation can be observed, as significant fluctuation in curve displayed in 
Fig.14 (a), while for AR and AL, there is no obvious fluctuations in data, 
demonstrating a stable growth of passivation film. For the AL specimen, passivation 
process started in an instantaneous response, which indicates the highest passivation 
rate compared to other specimens.  Here, current-time transients can be used to reveal the kinetics of anodic 
formation of passive film, which can be expressed as following 2D and 3D growth 
models [27]: 
where nF is the number of moles transferred during film formation; M is the molar 
weight of the mole; h is the thickness of deposited layer; N0 is the density of active 
sites; kg is the nuclei rate constant of lateral growth; ρ is the density of deposited 
matter; A is the nucleation rate constant; k1 and k2 are the nuclei rate constant for 
parallel and vertical growth with respect to electrode surface [27, 28]. These two 
formulas can be respectively simplified to instantaneous and progressive processes, 
which is expressed as: 
Accordingly, the growth 2D and 3D mode for the passive film of studied Ti-6Al-4V 
alloy is calculated and drawn in Fig.15. It can be observed that there is no significant 
change in passive films generation for AS, AR and AL specimens, but the generation 
process pf passive film on Ti-6Al-4V surface is closed to 3D growth mode during 
polarization. 

4.2.2 Growth   
 According to the results as mentioned above, it is evident that the growth of 
passivation film experiences three stage, as a diagram explained in Fig.16 At the first 
stage, passivation film is rapidly formed on the alloy surface in where grain size 
determines the film generation speed. At the second stage, the formed passivation film 
plays a role in a protection barrier to impede corrosion current [27], as displayed in i-
T diagram. At the third stage, the corrosion current is tending towards stability and the 
passivation film is gradually building up on alloy surface. Since AL and AR 
specimens have smaller α-lath width and subsequent high level of grain boundaries, 
especially in LAGBs, compared to AS, more favorable diffusion channels and active 
sites were provided to Ti, Al and O ions, thereby contributing to a high speed for
passive film generation [25]. It is also the reason why high level of Ti content was 
detected in passivation film on AL and AR surface. 

4.2.3 Breakdown   
 Based on the Point Defect Model (PDM), the oxygen vacancy and cation 
diffusion rate from the metal/film interface to the passivation film/solution interface 
are particularly critical to the passivation film growth process [29, 30]. The formation 
of cation vacancies is influenced by chloride ions at the interface between passivation 
film and substrate metal. If more oxygen vacancies are transferred to passivation 
film/solution interface, more chloride ions will be adsorbed, and more cation 
vacancies will be generated. It is well known that high concentration of cation 
vacancies will offer the position to produce voids appearance and subsequent pit 
defects [31]. Therefore, with the applied potential increase, substantial Cl- is absorbed 
into oxygen vacancies at alloy surface and pit nucleation begin to appear in the 
passivation film, leading to increased outward flux of cations in corrosive media and 
then breakdown of passivation film [17, 29], as schematic illustration in Fig.17. 
Fig.18 further displays the appearance of corroded regions on as-corroded Ti-6Al-4V 
specimen. It can be found that the passivation film at dissolutive boundaries has been 
curled and ruptured, and from the EDS results, a large number of Cl- ions are enriched 
at dissolutive boundaries due to accumulation of cation vacancies. Moreover, PDM 
indicates there exists a stable electric field in the passive film between substrate metal 
and corrosive solution, which drives point defects diffusion [32].With the potential 
increase, hydrogen ions at the interface between the passivation film and the solution 
help to accelerate passive film dissolution, and meanwhile the passivation rate is less 
than the dissolution rate, resulting in a gradual peeling of passivation film.  
5. Conclusions 
 In this work, Ti-6Al-4V alloy components were fabricated using WAAM and 
they have exceptional corrosion properties in 0.6M NaCl solution. The behind 
mechanism of enhanced corrosion production in studied material was evaluated 
comprehensively. The findings include: 
(1) For WAAM-produced Ti-6Al-4V alloy component, the corrosion property 
can be improved by magnetic arc oscillations during deposit, which lies in the partitioning of lamellar α phase in microstructure by introducing a string effect into 
melt pool. 
 (2) Due to grain refinement, more grain boundaries bring an enhanced three-
dimensional nucleation and growth to passive films during polarization stage. It is 
well accepted that this passive film is composed of TiO2, Ti2O3, Al2O3 and tiny 
amounts of V oxides. 
 (3) During passivation, lamellar α phases will be firstly dissolved, and then 
followed by β-phase. Relatively high concentrations of Cl- will impede the production 
of buffered passive films, and further generate pit defect in dissolutive regions that 
show a curled-up features on metal surface. 